[DEP-08]: Introduce scale-in support for multi-node etcd clusters (#1369)
gardener/etcd-druid: docs/proposals/08-scale-in.md

---
title: Scaling-in a multi-node etcd cluster
dep-number: 08
creation-date: 2026-06-15
status: implementable
authors:
- "@seshachalam-yv"
- "@CaptainIRS"
reviewers:
- "etcd-druid-maintainers"
---

# DEP-08: Scaling-in a multi-node etcd cluster managed by `etcd-druid`

## Summary

This proposal introduces safe scale-in support for multi-node etcd clusters managed by `etcd-druid`, enabling a cluster to shrink without risking quorum loss or leaving etcd membership in an inconsistent state.

> Today, `etcd-druid` blocks any decrease of `etcd.spec.replicas` other than to zero (hibernation), so operators have no declarative way to shrink an HA cluster.

Reviewer: move this as the first line.

Author: 👍

> The user experience is symmetric with scale-out: declarative, quorum-safe, and free of `etcdctl` intervention.

Reviewer 2: what do you mean by "free of etcdctl intervention" here ?

## Terminology

> - **bootstrap-with-existing-cluster** — joining etcd members to an existing source cluster, and later removing those members. Defined by [GEP-0039](https://github.com/gardener/enhancements/tree/main/geps/0039-live-control-plane-migration) and introduced into `etcd-druid` by [PR #1364](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1364). The "remove source members" half is one of the two flows this DEP supports.

Reviewer: i am confused why is this in `terminology`? because it also mentions `The "remove source members" half is one of the two flows this DEP supports."` which is hard to follow and correlate.

Author: Removed

> - **bootstrap-with-existing-cluster** — joining etcd members to an existing source cluster, and later removing those members. Defined by [GEP-0039](https://github.com/gardener/enhancements/tree/main/geps/0039-live-control-plane-migration) and introduced into `etcd-druid` by [PR #1364](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1364). The "remove source members" half is one of the two flows this DEP supports.

Reviewer 2: I also agree with @unmarshall here, you should just simply define the terminology, or may be to give extra context you can give link to druid doc in which that feature is defined, not the PR link.

Author: updated the doc

> - **`members_removed` bucket** — the boltdb bucket inside each etcd member's local data directory. etcd writes a member's ID into this bucket when `MemberRemove` is applied. This DEP's anti-rejoin guard reads it to distinguish a permanently removed member from one that should be re-added during scale-out.

Reviewer: >This DEP's anti-rejoin guard reads it to distinguish a permanently removed member from one that should be re-added during scale-out.

Not clear. Why do you wish to distinguish. `members_removed` is a tombstone list of cluster member IDs that have been removed. These are 64 bit IDs and these will/should never be re-used, right?

Author: Anyway, this has been removed from the Terminology section — members_removed is now explained only in the anti-rejoin guard section where it's used.

> These are 64 bit IDs and these will/should never be re-used, right?

The check simply looks up the corresponding etcd member's ID in the members_removed bucket to determine whether that member was removed — it's not about member IDs being reused.

> - **`members_removed` bucket** — the boltdb bucket inside each etcd member's local data directory. etcd writes a member's ID into this bucket when `MemberRemove` is applied. This DEP's anti-rejoin guard reads it to distinguish a permanently removed member from one that should be re-added during scale-out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **`members_removed` bucket** — It's boltdb bucket created inside each etcd member's local bbolt database file. Each etcd member writes a member's ID into this bucket when `MemberRemove` is applied.
```
I guess reason shouldn't be mention in terminology

- **scale-in** — any reduction of the live etcd cluster's voting-member count. Covers both `etcd.spec.replicas`-driven shrinks and removal of source members joined via `bootstrapWithExistingCluster`.

> - **`ScaleOperationInProgress` condition** — a status condition on the `Etcd` resource introduced by this DEP. `True` with reason `ScalingIn` / `ScalingOut` / `BootstrapMembersRemoval` while the operation is active; `False` otherwise. Used both as the admission-time gate (via CEL) and as the in-flight handoff between reconcile steps.

Reviewer: i am not sure why is this getting reflected in this section?

Author: Removed.

> - **`ScaleOperationInProgress` condition** — a status condition on the `Etcd` resource introduced by this DEP. `True` with reason `ScalingIn` / `ScalingOut` / `BootstrapMembersRemoval` while the operation is active; `False` otherwise. Used both as the admission-time gate (via CEL) and as the in-flight handoff between reconcile steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **`ScaleOperationInProgress` condition** — a status condition on the `Etcd` resource introduced by this DEP. 
```
same as above, reason shouldn't be mention in terminology ... may be discuss in some other section.

> - **`StatefulSet.PreSync`** — the existing pre-reconcile hook in `etcd-druid`'s StatefulSet component that runs before the StatefulSet is created or updated.

Reviewer: it is not a terminology, why is this here?

- **quorum-safe removal** — a member removal that leaves the cluster with at least `⌊N/2⌋ + 1` healthy voting members after the removal, where `N` is the post-removal voting-member count.

> - **WAL** — etcd's write-ahead log, stored in each member's local data directory. Its metadata records the local member's ID, which the anti-rejoin guard reads to look up its own entry in `members_removed`.

Reviewer: >which the anti-rejoin guard reads to look up its own entry in `members_removed`.

Since you have not really introduced what `anti-rejoin guard` is - any reference to it in the terminology section is quite confusing and not really required.

Reviewer 2: same comment as @unmarshall

> ## Motivation

Reviewer 3: To me the contents of the current motivation section looks more like "what we need" instead of "why we need". Can you talk more about the importance of why scale-out is so important, and what are those particular usecases that increases the importance of this feature?

Right now it talks more about the "limitation" than what we actually "gain" by having this. IMO motivation section should highlight the "gains" of doing it, instead of focussing more on the existing gaps.

While both approaches ( what you did vs what I suggest ) look the same from high-level, I think the way it is narrated makes all the difference when someone reads this section trying to understand the significance of this feature/DEP.

> Two distinct use cases drive scale-in support, and `etcd-druid` fails operators in both today:

Reviewer: when you mention `use cases` then you should provide proper use cases.
See https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-scheduling/4671-gang-scheduling/README.md#user-stories-optional OR any other KEP that is written with user stories.

Author: Updated

1. **`etcd.spec.replicas`-driven scale-in.** Reverting a temporary scale-out, or shrinking a cluster provisioned for peak load. The current CEL admission rule rejects any `replicas` decrease (other than to zero for hibernation), so there is no declarative path to remove members and resize the StatefulSet without risking quorum.

> 2. **Removing source members joined via `bootstrapWithExistingCluster`.** After [PR #1364](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1364) joins the destination to a source cluster, the operator decommissions source members by removing them from `etcd.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members`. Without this DEP that final step has no declarative path. See [GEP-0039 — Member removal from the cluster](https://github.com/gardener/enhancements/tree/main/geps/0039-live-control-plane-migration#member-removal-from-the-cluster) for the full sequence.

Reviewer: >Without this DEP that final step has no declarative path

Which final step?

> Both reduce to the same shape: a declarative signal that the cluster should shrink, and a controller that removes members safely before the StatefulSet changes. This proposal exposes one mechanism that handles both.

Reviewer: >and a controller that removes members safely before the StatefulSet changes

To safely do scale-in - `OnDelete` update strategy will become a pre-requisite right?

Author: Not Needed.

## Goals

* Provide a declarative, safe scale-in path via the `Etcd` API.
* Guarantee quorum and availability throughout the operation.
* Prevent removed members from rejoining (pod restart / PVC reuse).

> * Support both `replicas`-driven scale-in and removal of source members joined via `bootstrapWithExistingCluster`.

Reviewer: will the first goal not already subsume this one?

> * Maintain full backward compatibility for single-node clusters and hibernation.

Reviewer: this goal is not clear.

Author: Updated the doc with  precise goals.

## Non-Goals

> * Hibernation (`replicas: N → 0`): remains handled by the existing hibernation flow.

Reviewer: The way we interpret `hibernation` is not really correct. Hibernation should never change the replicas of `Etcd` cluster.  The correct realization of hibernate is captured in issue (https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922) - this GREP does not handle that and that is clear.

Author: Removed the reference hibernation from the Doc.

> * Single-node etcd clusters: scale-in does not apply — there is no quorum-safe path to remove the sole member.

Reviewer 3: This is the same as the above point, right? because in case of single member the only scale-in is from 1->0 and that is considered as `Hibernation` technically. So maybe we can combine these two points into one to imply the same.

Author: Updated the doc before your review comment

Author: Removed the hibernation reference. As Madhav mentioned, hibernation is intent-based; reducing replicas from N to 0 is a distinct scaling operation and not hibernation, so the DEP no longer conflates the two.

> * Exposing member removal via any externally callable surface (EtcdOpsTask, HTTP endpoint, CLI subcommand, Job). Member removal is internal to the controller and cannot be safely invoked outside the reconciler's coordination.

Reviewer: Perhaps we can rephrase this:
```
Exposing member removal via any externally callable surface (EtcdOpsTask, HTTP endpoint, CLI subcommand, Job). Member removal is a sensitive operation that must remain internal to the controller's reconciliation flow. Exposing it as an external API would make it trivial to trigger permanent quorum loss through incorrect or ill-timed invocation.
```

## Proposal

### Approach

> Scale-in is orchestrated by `etcd-druid` through the existing `etcd` controller (`internal/controller/etcd`). The process is driven by changes to the `Etcd` resource, and progress is tracked explicitly through the `ScaleOperationInProgress` status condition to ensure deterministic coordination across reconcile cycles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scale-in is orchestrated by `etcd-druid` through the existing [etcd controller](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/development/controllers.md#etcd-controller). The process is driven by changes to the `Etcd` resource, and progress is tracked explicitly through the `ScaleOperationInProgress` status condition to ensure deterministic coordination across reconcile cycles.
```
I think we can remove where etcd controller is present in code, but what I would suggest is you can mention the etcd controller doc link: https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/development/controllers.md#etcd-controller

It aims to achieve safe scale-in by:

> - Removing etcd members one per reconcile cycle, in a quorum-safe order, before the underlying StatefulSet is shrunk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Removing etcd cluster members one per reconcile cycle, in a quorum-safe order, before the underlying StatefulSet is shrunk.
```

> - Deleting freed PVCs during `StatefulSet.PreSync`, after etcd membership has converged, and allowing them to finalize when `StatefulSet.Sync` terminates the surplus pods.

Reviewer 2: why deleting the PVCs before deleting the member pods ? IMO, PVCs can be deleted at the end as well

Author: `PVC` deletion is part of the scale-in block, already gated by ScalingIn detection in `PreSync` — where the controller has just removed the surplus members and knows the `etcd.spec.replicas < StatefulSet.spec.replicas` delta identifying the surplus ordinals.

- Preventing removed members from silently rejoining by adding an anti-rejoin guard in `etcd-backup-restore`.

Scale-in is triggered when:

- An operator decreases `etcd.spec.replicas`, or

> - An operator removes member entries from `etcd.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members` or unsets `etcd.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster`.

Reviewer 2: I think this section should be mentioned above this section `It aims to achieve safe scale-in by` as we should define the how it's being detected later how it's being done.

> ### Prerequisites

Reviewer 2: Isn't this section should also be mentioned above `Approach` section ?

Author: 👍

> * The etcd cluster must be running with all members healthy and quorum intact at the start of scale-in. If quorum is already lost, scale-in does not run — the cluster must be restored to a healthy state first.

Reviewer: when you say it does not run - does it mean that the reconciler will continue to requeue till the time it is safe to scale-in? If that is the case then "does not run" is not the correct framing.

Author: Updated

### `etcd-druid` changes

This section describes the status, validation, and reconcile-flow changes required in `etcd-druid`.

#### Status condition

> A new `ScaleOperationInProgress` condition is introduced in `etcd.status.conditions` to track scale operations. The `etcd` controller sets it to `True` when scale work starts and clears it on successful completion.

Reviewer: why is this condition required?
Let us say the user changed Etcd resource reducing its replicas from 3 -> 2, this triggered the reconciler to then do the needful. While the reconciler is in the process of doing it, the user changed the Etcd resource reducing its replicas further from 2->1.
Now this should simply be blocked till the previous scale-in has completed and this can be done without this condition as well, right?

> A new `ScaleOperationInProgress` condition is introduced in `etcd.status.conditions` to track scale operations. The `etcd` controller sets it to `True` when scale work starts and clears it on successful completion.

Reviewer 2: I feel the name of condition should be `ScaleOperationProgress` if it's just capturing the progress of both scale-in/out operations.

Author: The naming follows the [Kubernetes API-conventions guidance for condition types ](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties): "the name should be an adjective ("Ready", "OutOfDisk") or a past-tense verb ("Succeeded", "Failed") rather than a present-tense verb", with status being True/False/Unknown. `ScaleOperationInProgress` is an adjective-phrase describing observed state — = True reads as "a scale operation is in progress" — consistent with etcd-druid's existing conditions (Ready, AllMembersReady, BackupReady, BootstrappedWithExistingCluster). 
Dropping the "In" to ScaleOperationProgress turns it into a bare noun that fits the guidance less well and reads as if it holds a progress value. The Type is deliberately direction-agnostic (whether any scale op is underway); the reason says which one. Leaning toward keeping ScaleOperationInProgress, but open to renaming if all the reviewers prefer it.

| Type                       | Status | Reason                    | Description |
|----------------------------|--------|---------------------------|-------------|
| `ScaleOperationInProgress` | True   | ScalingIn                 | `etcd.spec.replicas`-driven scale-in in progress |
| `ScaleOperationInProgress` | True   | BootstrapMembersRemoval   | Removing source members joined via `bootstrapWithExistingCluster` |

> | `ScaleOperationInProgress` | True   | ScalingOut                | Scale-out in progress (set by [DEP-03](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/03-scaling-up-an-etcd-cluster.md)) |

Reviewer: why should scale-out need this condition? Is this only meant for Observability?

Author: Updated the doc - Why condition is required ?

| `ScaleOperationInProgress` | False  | —                         | No scale operation in progress |

The condition is used by:

> - CEL validation rules to reject conflicting concurrent scale changes.

Reviewer: can you define what `conflicting` means in the context of scale-in or scale-out?

- `StatefulSet.PreSync` to decide whether to run the member-removal branch.

#### CEL validation rules

The existing [field-level rule that blocks `replicas` decreases](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/api/core/v1alpha1/etcd.go#L385) will be removed so that multi-node clusters can be scaled in declaratively. Hibernation (`replicas: N → 0`) remains covered by the existing hibernation flow.

> New object-level CEL rules will guard conflicting operations using the `ScaleOperationInProgress` condition. A `replicas` decrease while `bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is set is treated as a normal `ScalingIn`; bootstrap-member removal is a separate operation and must not run concurrently with scale-in or scale-out.

Reviewer: >bootstrap-member removal is a separate operation and must not run concurrently with scale-in or scale-out.

Did not understand this restriction properly. Can you please elaborate on why it must not be run concurrently? In the end whether it is members which are directly managed by this `Etcd` resource or member that are part of this cluster but are managed by another `Etcd` resource - the bottom line is that quorum should be maintained.

Author: udpated the doc.

| User action | Allowed when | Rejected when |
|-------------|--------------|---------------|

> | Increase `spec.replicas` | No `ScalingIn` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` is in progress | `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingIn` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` |

Reviewer: What happens today when you scale-in a STS and while that is in progress you scale-out again? Is that rejected? What problems do you see if you allow a mix of operations to be executed concurrently since in context of etcd cluster we also have to ensure quorum? The DEP does not really describe any problems. It just says that its disallowed.

Author: Updated the doc why it is required

// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:message="Cannot unset bootstrapWithExistingCluster while scale-in or scale-out is in progress.",rule="has(oldSelf.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster) && !has(self.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster) ? !self.status.conditions.exists(c, c.type == 'ScaleOperationInProgress' && c.status == 'True' && (c.reason == 'ScalingIn' || c.reason == 'ScalingOut')) : true"
```

#### Reconcile flow

The `etcd` controller reconciliation is extended with a scale-operation detection step, a member-removal branch in `StatefulSet.PreSync`, and status cleanup for removed members. Existing reconciliation steps continue to run in the same order. The `ScaleOperationInProgress=False` update is folded into `recordReconcileSuccessOperation`, so completing scale-in does not require an additional status patch.

```
reconcileSpec()
  1. recordReconcileStartOperation
  2. ensureFinalizer

>   3. detectAndRecordScaleOperation       — NEW: reconciler patches Status.ScaleOperationInProgress

Reviewer 2: are you also harmonizing the scale-out operation via this proposal ?

Author: No.

  4. preSyncEtcdResources
       → StatefulSet.PreSync():
            a. Pre-hibernation snapshot   (existing)
            b. Pre-upgrade snapshot       (existing)
            c. Scale-in member removal    — NEW: at most one removal per reconcile cycle
                 - ensureMemberRemoval()  via etcd v3 client
                 - next reconcile health-checks, picks next candidate

>             d. PVC deletion               — NEW: ScalingIn only; runs once after the

Reviewer: Is there a reason that PVC deletion happens as part of `PreSync`?
While member removal, taking a snapshot are orthogonal to lifecycle of STS or the pods that it manages, PVC is intrinsically tied to the lifecycle of the STS and is part of the STS object model. So while you can keep member-removal as part of the PreSync PVC deletion can move to Sync, right?

If there are strong reasons to keep this in PreSync then please list them down.

Author: Moving PVC deletion into StatefulSet.Sync would force Sync to re-derive that same scale-in context, splitting one logical operation … across two components. Keeping both halves in PreSync … keeps the scale-in decision in one place.

>             d. PVC deletion               — NEW: ScalingIn only; runs once after the

Reviewer 2: IMO, PVC deletion should happend at last, wdyt ?

Author: The PVC deletion is part of the scale-in block, already gated by ScalingIn detection in PreSync — where the surplus members have just been removed and the etcd.spec.replicas < StatefulSet.spec.replicas delta identifies the surplus ordinals. Doing it in Sync would force Sync to re-derive that same scale-in context, splitting one operation across two components.

                                                 final removal in this reconcile cycle.
                                                 Issues Delete for each PVC of an ordinal
                                                 beyond spec.replicas. Each PVC enters
                                                 Terminating immediately but stays Bound
                                                 until step 5 unmounts it.
  5. syncEtcdResources
       → ConfigMap.Sync()                  regenerate initial-cluster
       → StatefulSet.Sync()                reconcile StatefulSet
  6. cleanupEtcdResources

>        → cleanupRemovedMembers()          — NEW: prune Status.Members[] entries for

Reviewer: any reason why the status update is part of spec reconcile flow and not status reconcile flow? You could argue that we are also updating last operation as part of reconcileSpec flow. Well the argument to keep it there was that last operation captures the state of the last reconcile spec operation and therefore it is tied closely to the reconcileSpec flow as it marks the beginning and end of a reconcile spec flow.

but status members/bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers are eventually consistent and should be part of status update flow.

Author: - `ScaleOperationInProgress` condition — stays in the spec-reconcile flow. Like LastOperation, it marks the begin/end of a scale operation. More importantly, the CEL admission rules can only reject a conflicting change if the condition is already persisted — writing it in the eventually-consistent status flow would widen the admission window and let a conflicting scale-out slip through.

- `status.members` — agreed, not touched in spec-reconcile. It's an eventually-consistent health observation owned by the status flow (the health checker re-derives it every cycle), so the proposal no longer prunes it here. That's been dropped.

 - `status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` — pruned in spec-reconcile because that's the only flow that knows which members were removed. The MemberRemove calls happen in the spec-reconcile flow via the etcd client, so it's the flow that knows exactly which joined source members were just removed; the status-reconcile flow (health checker) has no visibility into that. It therefore prunes the corresponding entries as part of the same operation.

        P->>P: Delete PVCs for ordinals beyond spec.replicas
        Note over P: PVCs go Terminating, stay Bound until kubelet unmounts in step 5
    end
    P-->>R: StatefulSet.PreSync complete

    Note over R,S: Step 5 StatefulSet.Sync, compute ConfigMap and reconcile StatefulSet
    R->>S: Run StatefulSet.Sync
    S->>S: Regenerate initial-cluster ConfigMap
    opt ScalingIn
        S->>S: Shrink StatefulSet to spec.replicas
        Note over S: Surplus pods Terminate, kubelet unmounts each PVC, Terminating PVCs finalize
    end
    Note over S: BootstrapMembersRemoval keeps StatefulSet replicas unchanged

    Note over R,K: Step 6 Cleanup, prune in-line status only
    alt ScalingIn
        R->>K: Prune etcd.status.members entries
    else BootstrapMembersRemoval
        R->>K: Prune removed entries from bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers
    end

    Note over R: Step 7 recordReconcileSuccessOperation
    R->>R: Patch ScaleOperationInProgress=False (bundled with success patch)
    R-->>C: Reconcile complete
```

The relevant additions are described below. Existing steps (1–2, 4a–4b, 5) are unchanged and not described here.

##### Detection (Step 3)

> `detectAndRecordScaleOperation` runs after `ensureFinalizer` and decides the active scale operation by comparing `etcd.spec` against the existing `StatefulSet.spec` and `etcd.status`. It does not query the etcd cluster (no `MemberList()` call), so detection cannot be blocked by a transient etcd outage.

Reviewer: So consider the following case:
Initial state: `Etcd` cluster has 3 replicas
At T1:
Spec changed and scale-in happens where replicas are now changed to 2. An even has been enqueued into the reconciler. Etcd resource was looked up and it now has 2 replicas.
At T3:
`detectAndRecordScaleOperation` step runs and a condition.
However at T2: the Etcd replicas were changed back to 3. CEL allows it because by then it did not see any condition being set.

In this situation what will happen?

Author: - T1 — spec goes 3 → 2; a reconcile is enqueued.
 - T2 — spec goes back to 3 before the condition is set; CEL allows it (no condition yet).
- T3 — the reconcile runs against the latest spec, which is now 3.

Detection is level-triggered — detectAndRecordScaleOperation compares the current etcd.spec.replicas (3) against StatefulSet.spec.replicas (3). They match, so no scale operation is detected: the condition is not set (or is cleared), and no member is removed.

Even if a reconcile had briefly observed 2 between T1 and T2, the safety check runs again right before MemberRemove: the controller re-fetches the latest Etcd and StatefulSet, and if there's no replica delta it aborts and removes nothing. So the revert converges cleanly - no member removed, no stale condition.

The CEL gate is best-effort by design; correctness comes from level-triggered detection plus this pre-removal re-check. This is written up in the "Admission gate is best-effort; the controller is the guarantee" section.

##### Proposed solution

`etcd-backup-restore` adds a startup guard before the learner-add path. The guard checks whether the local etcd member was already removed from the cluster. If so, startup stops with `ErrMemberPermanentlyRemoved` instead of re-adding the member.

etcd records removed member IDs in the local boltdb `members_removed` bucket when `MemberRemove` is applied. `etcd-backup-restore` can use this record to distinguish a permanently removed member from a member that should be added back as part of scale-out.

The startup check is:

The guard inspects two on-disk artefacts of the local etcd data directory: the **WAL** — which records the local member's ID — and the boltdb backend's **`members_removed`** bucket. If the local member's own ID appears in `members_removed`, the cluster has explicitly removed it and the sidecar must not re-add it.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start[backup-restore init]
    Start --> Multi{Multi-node?}
    Multi -->|No| Normal[Normal init]
    Multi -->|Yes| WAL{WAL exists?}
    WAL -->|No| Normal
    WAL -->|Yes| Read[Read local member ID]
    Read --> DB{boltdb exists?}
    DB -->|No| Normal
    DB -->|Yes| Open[Open boltdb read-only]

>     Open -->|Fail| Failed[ErrMembershipCheckFailed]

Reviewer 2: may be a retry if `ErrMembershipCheckFailed`

Author: Updated the doc to retry

>     Open -->|OK| Removed{Own ID in members_removed?}

Reviewer 2: how do you check the ownID ?

Author: The local member's own ID is read from the WAL metadata under `<data-dir>/member/wal` — `etcd` records it as the `NodeID` field of the `WAL` Metadata.

    Removed -->|No| Normal
    Removed -->|Yes| Stop[ErrMemberPermanentlyRemoved]
```

The check is deliberately conservative:

- If the WAL is missing, there is no local member ID to check, so normal initialization continues.

> - If the boltdb file is missing, normal initialization continues through the existing path.

Reviewer 2: It will trigger the single member restoration ... right ?
Basically, a member which has been removed can be potentially re-added to the cluster if its data-dir get corrupted.

Author: Yes

## Terminology

- **bootstrap-with-existing-cluster** — the mechanism by which a new `Etcd` joins an existing etcd cluster instead of forming its own. See [Bootstrap with an Existing etcd Cluster](../concepts/bootstrap-with-existing-cluster.md).

## Motivation

`etcd-druid` supports scaling an etcd cluster *out* declaratively, but not *in*: the current admission rule rejects any decrease of `etcd.spec.replicas` other than to zero. Operators therefore have no safe, declarative way to shrink a multi-node cluster. Two concrete use cases need this.

### Use cases

**1. Shrinking an over-provisioned HA cluster.**
An operator who scaled a cluster out — either temporarily for a load spike, or because it was originally provisioned for peak load — needs to reduce it back (for example 5 → 3) by lowering `etcd.spec.replicas`, and have `etcd-druid` remove the surplus members and resize the cluster without running `etcdctl` or risking quorum. Today this is impossible: any non-zero decrease of `etcd.spec.replicas` is rejected at admission.

**2. Completing a live control-plane migration.**

> An operator migrating an etcd cluster between seeds without downtime, once the destination members have joined the source cluster (via `bootstrapWithExistingCluster`), needs to decommission the source members declaratively — by removing them from `etcd.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members` — so the cluster ends up running only on the destination. Today this final removal step has no declarative path. See [GEP-0039 — Member removal from the cluster](https://github.com/gardener/enhancements/tree/main/geps/0039-live-control-plane-migration#member-removal-from-the-cluster) for the full migration sequence.

Reviewer 4: Mentions of gardener-terms like control plane, Live CPM, seeds, source, target seeds, etc without any context. I would rather re-frame this as temporary scale-out and scale-in in order to migrate an etcd cluster from one cluster to another with zero downtime, an example of which is Gardener's Live CPM (link every concept so a non-gardener community member can read and understand this)

> Both reduce to the same shape: a declarative signal that the cluster should shrink, and a controller that removes members from the etcd cluster in `StatefulSet.PreSync` — before `StatefulSet.Sync` lowers the StatefulSet's replica count. This proposal exposes one mechanism that handles both.

Reviewer 4: This looks like implementation details which is unnecessary in this section

## Goals

* Provide a declarative, safe scale-in path via the `Etcd` API, covering both triggers: an `etcd.spec.replicas` decrease and removal of source members joined via `bootstrapWithExistingCluster`.
* Guarantee quorum and availability throughout the operation.
* Ensure a removed member cannot silently rejoin the cluster afterwards — even if its pod later restarts with stale data on a reused PVC.

## Non-Goals

* Scaling `replicas` to `0` (`replicas: N → 0`) — a distinct operation, out of scope for this DEP.

> * Single-node etcd clusters — no quorum-safe path to remove the sole member.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Single-node etcd clusters — no concept of scale-in for a single-node etcd cluster since there is only one member in the cluster, and scaling down any further (to zero) leads to hibernation.
```

If you don't want to use the term `hibernation`, feel free to change that.

Author: Fixed as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/commits/ce12ce1eb3d3bee35155d726122e314a33e533da

> * Exposing member removal via any externally callable surface (EtcdOpsTask, HTTP endpoint, CLI subcommand, Job). Member removal is a sensitive operation that must remain internal to the controller's reconciliation flow. Exposing it as an external API would make it easy to leave the cluster below quorum, or hard to recover, through incorrect or ill-timed invocation.

Reviewer 4: What does `externally callable surface` or `external API` mean? External to what?

Author: Phrasing wasn't clear, and it turns out this point is really already covered in the Alternatives section (where the EtcdOpsTask / HTTP / CLI surfaces are each discussed and rejected). So instead of rewording, dropped the redundant Non-Goal bullet. Thanks!

## Proposal

### Prerequisites

> * The etcd cluster should be running with all members healthy and quorum intact for scale-in to make progress. If quorum is not intact, the controller still records the scale operation but withholds every `MemberRemove`: the per-cycle quorum-safety check keeps requeuing with backoff until the cluster recovers, so no member is removed while quorum is degraded. The operator can either wait for quorum to be restored or declaratively roll back the change (increase `spec.replicas` / restore the bootstrap members again).

Reviewer 4: Should it not be possible to scale-in an unhealthy member? Or would you leave that out of scope for this? If yes, then please add it to the Non-Goals section so it's explicitly mentioned.

Author: Fixed as part of 7298f76.

### Approach

> Scale-in is orchestrated by `etcd-druid` through the existing [etcd controller](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/development/controllers.md#etcd-controller). The process is driven by changes to the `Etcd` resource, and progress is tracked explicitly through the `ScaleOperationInProgress` status condition to ensure deterministic coordination across reconcile cycles.

Reviewer 4: I like the name `ScaleOperationInProgress` since it encompasses both scale-in and scale-out. Does that mean the implementation PR will also set this condition during scale-out, so that multiple subsequent scale-out operations are also validated to ensure spec.replicas doesn't change when a scale-out operation is currently in progress?

Author: Yes, the condition is set during scale-out too: the controller records `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with `reason=ScalingOut` while a scale-out is underway. That's exactly what makes the admission gate symmetric, so a `scale-in` can't race an in-flight `scale-out`. The potential reasons (`ScalingIn`, `ScalingOut`, `BootstrapMembersRemoval`) are listed in the reason table under the "Status condition" section.

Scale-in is triggered when:

- An operator decreases `etcd.spec.replicas`, or
- An operator removes member entries from `etcd.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members` or unsets `etcd.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster`.

It aims to achieve safe scale-in by:

- Removing etcd cluster members one per reconcile cycle, in a quorum-safe order, before the underlying StatefulSet is shrunk.
- Deleting freed PVCs during `StatefulSet.Sync`, before the StatefulSet replica count is reduced, so the surplus PVCs are reclaimed as the pods are terminated.
- Preventing removed members from silently rejoining by adding an anti-rejoin guard in `etcd-backup-restore`.

### `etcd-druid` changes

This section describes the status, validation, and reconcile-flow changes required in `etcd-druid`.

#### Status condition

> ##### Why this condition is required

Reviewer 4: `this` meaning? Needs to be mentioned

Author: Fixed as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/commits/55be461c336b5e1ea2df40aed442a406ef764c7d

| `ScaleOperationInProgress` | True   | ScalingOut                | Scale-out in progress — set so the admission gate can reject a scale-in that races an in-flight scale-out (see below) |
| `ScaleOperationInProgress` | False  | —                         | No scale operation in progress |

The condition is used by:

- CEL validation rules to reject conflicting concurrent scale changes.
- `StatefulSet.PreSync` to decide whether to run the member-removal branch.

The `ScalingOut` reason does not change the existing scale-out mechanics from [DEP-03](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/03-scaling-up-an-etcd-cluster.md). Scale-out remains driven by a `spec.replicas` increase; new members join as learners via the `etcd-backup-restore` sidecar. The reason is introduced as a coordination marker for the symmetric admission gate: while a scale-out is in flight, a racing scale-in must be rejected for the same conflict reason described above. The controller therefore records `ScalingOut` for CEL to read, while the actual scale-out flow remains unchanged.

#### CEL validation rules

> The existing [field-level rule that blocks `replicas` decreases](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/api/core/v1alpha1/etcd.go#L385) will be removed so that multi-node clusters can be scaled in declaratively. Scaling to `replicas: 0` remains handled by the existing `replicas → 0` code path (see Non-Goals) and is unaffected by the new rules, which apply only when both `self.spec.replicas > 0` and `oldSelf.spec.replicas > 0`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The existing [field-level rule that blocks `replicas` decreases](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/5b90b4a7dc7da4f4d35ea9905103d8b60b9f6e8e/api/core/v1alpha1/etcd.go#L546) will be removed so that multi-node clusters can be scaled in declaratively. Scaling to `replicas: 0` remains handled by the existing `replicas → 0` code path (see Non-Goals) and is unaffected by the new rules, which apply only when both `self.spec.replicas > 0` and `oldSelf.spec.replicas > 0`.
```

Previously pointing to wrong line in the etcd API file

Author: Fixed as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/commits/55be461c336b5e1ea2df40aed442a406ef764c7d

| User action | Allowed when | Rejected when |
|-------------|--------------|---------------|
| Increase `spec.replicas` | No `ScalingIn` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` is in progress | `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingIn` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` |
| Decrease `spec.replicas` | No `ScalingOut` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` is in progress | `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingOut` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` |
| Remove entries from `spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members` | No `ScalingIn` or `ScalingOut` is in progress | `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingIn` or `ScalingOut` |

> | Unset `spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` | No `ScalingIn` or `ScalingOut` is in progress | `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingIn` or `ScalingOut` |

Reviewer 4: Wouldn't it make sense to keep `Allowed when` as `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` for all the rows, so that a new scale-in request is not allowed when currently a scale-in operation is in progress (same applies for other operations too)

Author: A new same-direction request doesn't cause a problem — a further `scale-in` while scaling in (or `scale-out` while scaling out) just moves the target, and the controller retargets to the latest spec and keeps removing/adding one member per cycle. Only the opposite direction is a real conflict, so that's all the table rejects. Do you see a specific problem with allowing same-direction changes that we should block for?

                                              StatefulSet replica count. Each PVC enters
                                              Terminating and is reclaimed as the surplus
                                              pod is terminated by the replica reduction.
  6. cleanupEtcdResources
       → BootstrapMembersRemoval only: prune the just-removed entries from
                                                 status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers.
                                                 (status.members is re-derived by the
                                                 health checker, not pruned here.)
  7. recordReconcileSuccessOperation
       → Patch Status.ScaleOperationInProgress=False (existing patch already runs here)
```

The Mermaid diagram below shows the scale-in control flow. The existing pre-hibernation and pre-upgrade snapshot steps remain in `StatefulSet.PreSync`, but are omitted because they are not changed by this proposal.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant C as Consumer
    participant R as etcd controller
    participant P as StatefulSet.PreSync
    participant E as etcd
    participant S as StatefulSet.Sync

>     participant K as Cleanup

Reviewer 4: What exactly is this `Cleanup` actor?

Author: Cleanup was not a separate actor — it's the [cleanupEtcdResources](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/internal/controller/etcd/reconcile_spec.go#L96) step that already runs as part of reconcileSpec, at the end of the reconciliation after sync. Thanks for pointing it out — rephrased the diagram to use the right term `cleanupEtcdResources` instead of `cleanup`.

`etcd.status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` records the joined source members and is not re-derived by the health checker, so for `BootstrapMembersRemoval` the spec-reconcile flow prunes the entries for the members it just removed.

##### Clear condition (Step 7)

`recordReconcileSuccessOperation` includes the `ScaleOperationInProgress=False` update in its existing status patch.

### `etcd-backup-restore` changes

#### Anti-rejoin guard

##### Problem

During scale-in, `etcd-druid` removes an etcd member from the cluster before the corresponding StatefulSet pod is terminated. In that short window, the pod can still restart with its old data directory.

Without a guard, `etcd-backup-restore` interprets the state *"this pod has local etcd data, but its member ID is not present in the live cluster"* as a scale-out case and re-adds the removed member as a learner. The controller removes it again, the same pod re-adds itself, and the cluster enters a remove/re-add loop.

> ##### Proposed solution

Reviewer 4: Would it not be more deterministic for druid to inform etcdbr via a HTTP call that this member is to-be-removed and/or removed, so that this is registered explicitly by etcdbr. If the WAL + BoltDB route is completely deterministic, then that's ok.

Author: Yes, the `WAL` + `boltDB` approach is **fully deterministic** because the `members_removed` tombstone is written by `etcd` itself when `MemberRemove` is applied. The guard reads this directly from the member's own data directory. If the member's ID appears in `members_removed`, it means the cluster has definitively removed that member. There is no separate state that needs to be recorded or kept in sync.

Using an `HTTP` call would replace this single on-disk source of truth with a series of steps that can fail. Druid would need to find the correct pod, reach it over the peer service, and wait for a response confirming that the member was removed. `etcd-br` would then have to store that information itself and, after a restart, determine which members had already been removed. Unlike `etcd`'s own durable record, this additional state is best-effort and can become inconsistent. It would also require exposing a removal endpoint on the etcd-backup-restore container, which is a risk already discussed in the **Alternatives** section.

So, the `WAL` + `boltDB` approach is not just acceptable—it's the deterministic solution. An `HTTP` handshake would introduce additional failure modes instead of eliminating them.

---
title: Scaling-in a multi-node etcd cluster
dep-number: 08
creation-date: 2026-06-15
status: implementable
authors:
- "@seshachalam-yv"
- "@CaptainIRS"
reviewers:
- "etcd-druid-maintainers"
---

# DEP-08: Scaling-in a multi-node etcd cluster managed by `etcd-druid`

## Summary

Today, `etcd-druid` blocks any decrease of `etcd.spec.replicas` other than to zero, so operators have no declarative way to shrink a multi-node etcd cluster.

This proposal introduces safe scale-in support for multi-node etcd clusters managed by `etcd-druid`, enabling a cluster to shrink without risking quorum loss or leaving etcd membership in an inconsistent state. The user experience is symmetric with scale-out: the operator only changes the `Etcd` resource, and `etcd-druid` removes members safely.

## Terminology

> - **bootstrap-with-existing-cluster** — the mechanism by which a new `Etcd` joins an existing etcd cluster instead of forming its own. See [Bootstrap with an Existing etcd Cluster](../concepts/bootstrap-with-existing-cluster.md).

Reviewer 3: shouldn't this rather be `bootstrapWithExistingCluster` as that's the original term and I see close to 25 references to that instead of the `bootstrap-with-existing-cluster` which is only repeated a couple of times. We might need to change other occurrences as well.

Author: Updated as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/commits/c407130fd429ba1103aafc004c325335091fb3f6.

## Motivation

`etcd-druid` supports scaling an etcd cluster *out* declaratively, but not *in*: the current admission rule rejects any decrease of `etcd.spec.replicas` other than to zero. Operators therefore have no safe, declarative way to shrink a multi-node cluster. Two concrete use cases need this.

### Use cases

**1. Shrinking an over-provisioned HA cluster.**

> An operator who scaled a cluster out — either temporarily for a load spike, or because it was originally provisioned for peak load — needs to reduce it back (for example 5 → 3) by lowering `etcd.spec.replicas`, and have `etcd-druid` remove the surplus members and resize the cluster without running `etcdctl` or risking quorum. Today this is impossible: any non-zero decrease of `etcd.spec.replicas` is rejected at admission.

Reviewer 3: The reasoning 

```
An operator who scaled a cluster out — either temporarily for a load spike, or because it was originally provisioned for peak load — needs to reduce it back
```

is not actually valid because etcd is a strongly-consistent system and would take more time to commit a transaction when the no.of members in the cluster are increased. So I don't think people would be increasing the replica size because of load spike, that'd actually make it worse.

What I think you can mention as a usecase is from the below:
1. someone temporarily increased the replicas to be on the safer side w.r.t. availability when the underlying infra has uncertainities
2. if they over provisioned thinking they would need those many members but later analysis found that it's costing them performance and paying more cost for the extra volumes + compute resources so they might want to shrink down.

Reviewer: Yes, the reasons for temporarily increasing cluster size should be well-defined. 
* The temporary increase in replicas could be to improve fault tolerance during maintenance or upgrades (sw/hw).
* More number of followers improves the read performance (throughput but might negatively impact latency). So if there is a spike on an etcd cluster which is predominantly read-heavy, it could increase throughput.

Author: Updated as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/commits/c407130fd429ba1103aafc004c325335091fb3f6

**2. Migrating an etcd cluster with zero downtime.**
An operator migrating an etcd cluster from one hosting Kubernetes cluster to another without downtime, once the new members have joined the existing cluster (via [`bootstrapWithExistingCluster`](../concepts/bootstrap-with-existing-cluster.md)), needs to decommission the original members declaratively — by removing them from `etcd.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members` — so the cluster ends up running only on the new members. Today this final removal step has no declarative path. Gardener's [Live Control Plane Migration (GEP-0039)](https://github.com/gardener/enhancements/tree/main/geps/0039-live-control-plane-migration#member-removal-from-the-cluster) is one concrete use of this pattern.

**3. Zero-downtime update of a single-node etcd cluster.**

> An operator running a single-node (non-HA) etcd cluster needs to perform a disruptive change — such as a node/volume migration — without downtime. This can be done by temporarily scaling *out* (`1 → 2`) so a second member takes over serving, and then scaling *in* (`2 → 1`) once the change is complete. The scale-in half (`2 → 1`) is blocked today.

Reviewer 3: > An operator running a single-node (non-HA) etcd cluster needs to perform a disruptive change

This is a nice usecase, thanks for adding it!

> temporarily scaling *out* (`1 → 2`)

a nit comment..but can we enhance the example to `1->3` members because taking the final state to `2` members will make the cluster vulnerable to network partitions, we might not want to recommend that in the official proposal. Wdyt?

Reviewer: In self-hosted use case for a non-HA etcd cluster, the goal is to go with maxSurge ==1 for machines. So to allow least disruption and also to not incur cost of having multiple nodes, the middle ground is to go from 1 -> 2 and then from 2 -> 1. Remember in self-hosted every etcd pod is a static pod (one per Node). You also cannot assume that a customer running a non-HA etcd cluster will have 3 nodes available.

These reduce to the same shape: a declarative signal that the cluster should shrink, and a controller that safely removes the surplus etcd members before the underlying StatefulSet is resized. This proposal exposes one mechanism that handles them.

## Goals

* Provide a declarative, safe scale-in path via the `Etcd` API, covering both triggers: an `etcd.spec.replicas` decrease and removal of source members joined via `bootstrapWithExistingCluster`.
* Guarantee quorum and availability throughout the operation.
* Ensure a removed member cannot silently rejoin the cluster afterwards — even if its pod later restarts with stale data on a reused PVC.

## Non-Goals

* Supporting scale-in to zero (`replicas: N → 0`).

> * Supporting scale-in of a single-member cluster.

Reviewer 5: both are same

Reviewer 4: Not really, one talks about hibernation case, the other is about handling a non-HA etcd. Both are different.

Author: I've updated doc with single bullet point by including two points

## Proposal

### Prerequisites

Scale-in makes progress as long as the cluster has quorum. Any member — including an unhealthy one — can be removed as long as the remaining members still form a quorum after the removal; the per-cycle quorum-safety check enforces this (removing a dead member is the safe case, since it was not contributing to quorum anyway). If a removal would drop the cluster below quorum, the controller withholds that `MemberRemove` and requeues with backoff until the removal is once again quorum-safe.

### Approach

Scale-in is orchestrated by `etcd-druid` through the existing [etcd controller](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/development/controllers.md#etcd-controller). The process is driven by changes to the `Etcd` resource, and progress is tracked explicitly through the `ScaleOperationInProgress` status condition to ensure deterministic coordination across reconcile cycles.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Scale-in is orchestrated by `etcd-druid` through the existing [etcd controller](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/development/controllers.md#etcd-controller). The process is driven by changes to the `Etcd` resource, and progress is tracked explicitly through the `ScaleOperationInProgress` condition in the `Etcd.Status` to ensure deterministic coordination across reconcile cycles.

```

- Preventing removed members from silently rejoining by adding an anti-rejoin guard in `etcd-backup-restore`.

### `etcd-druid` changes

This section describes the status, validation, and reconcile-flow changes required in `etcd-druid`.

#### Status condition

##### Why the `ScaleOperationInProgress` condition is required

Scale-in removes etcd members one at a time before the StatefulSet is shrunk. Consider a `3 → 2` scale-in: the controller removes a member from the etcd cluster, but the StatefulSet has not yet been reduced. If a `2 → 3` scale-out lands in this window, the cluster is left in a conflicting state — a member has already been removed from etcd, yet `spec.replicas` is back to `3`. Looking only at `spec.replicas` and the StatefulSet replica count is no longer enough to decide whether the controller should finish the in-flight scale-in or treat the missing member as a fresh scale-out target. The safe behaviour is to **let an in-flight scale-in (or scale-out) complete and reject the opposite-direction scaling until it does**.

> To enforce this at admission time without introducing an admission webhook, the controller records an explicit `ScaleOperationInProgress` condition on the `Etcd` resource before starting membership-changing work, and CEL validation rules on the CRD reject an opposite-direction change while that condition is set. The condition is therefore both the admission-time gate (read by CEL) and the in-flight signal (read by `StatefulSet.PreSync`). The admission gate is best-effort — see [Admission gate is best-effort; the controller is the guarantee](#admission-gate-is-best-effort-the-controller-is-the-guarantee) below for how the controller closes the remaining window.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enforce this at admission time without introducing an admission webhook, the controller records an explicit `ScaleOperationInProgress` condition on the `Etcd.Status` sub-resource before starting membership-changing work, and CEL validation rules on the CRD reject an opposite-direction change while that condition is set. The condition is therefore both the admission-time gate (read by CEL) and the in-flight signal (read by `StatefulSet.PreSync`). The admission gate is best-effort — see [Admission gate is best-effort; the controller is the guarantee](#admission-gate-is-best-effort-the-controller-is-the-guarantee) below for how the controller closes the remaining window.
```

A new `ScaleOperationInProgress` condition is introduced in `etcd.status.conditions` to track scale operations. The `etcd` controller sets it to `True` when scale work starts and clears it on successful completion.

| Type                       | Status | Reason                    | Description |
|----------------------------|--------|---------------------------|-------------|
| `ScaleOperationInProgress` | True   | ScalingIn                 | `etcd.spec.replicas`-driven scale-in in progress |
| `ScaleOperationInProgress` | True   | BootstrapMembersRemoval   | Removing source members joined via `bootstrapWithExistingCluster` |

> | `ScaleOperationInProgress` | True   | ScalingOut                | Scale-out in progress — set so the admission gate can reject a scale-in that races an in-flight scale-out (see below) |

Reviewer 5: Please mention that `bootstrapWithExistingCluster` with an existing cluster is also scaling out and the condition will only be removed after all the bootstrapWithExistingCluster members have joined.

Author: updated the doc as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369#discussion_r3711383086

> | `ScaleOperationInProgress` | False  | —                         | No scale operation in progress |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| `ScaleOperationInProgress` | False  | NoScaleOperation                         | No scale operation in progress |
```

| User action | Allowed when | Rejected when |
|-------------|--------------|---------------|
| Increase `spec.replicas` | No `ScalingIn` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` is in progress | `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingIn` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` |
| Decrease `spec.replicas` | No `ScalingOut` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` is in progress | `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingOut` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` |

> | Remove entries from `spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members` | No `ScalingIn` or `ScalingOut` is in progress | `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingIn` or `ScalingOut` |

Reviewer 3: I see that we're allowing a new `ScalingIn` while the previous `ScalingIn` is already happening, similarly for `ScalingOut`. So just want to understand whether that is intended and nothing will go wrong in the process. Take for example: If 5->3 is already mid-way and someone triggers 3->1, right now it's allowed but the question is should we allow it?

Author: Yes, it's intended. A same-direction change is just a retarget, not a conflicting operation.

- If `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingIn`, member removal proceeds only when `etcd.spec.replicas < StatefulSet.spec.replicas`.
- If `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingOut`, the scale-out path proceeds only when `etcd.spec.replicas > StatefulSet.spec.replicas`.
- If `etcd.spec.replicas == StatefulSet.spec.replicas`, there is no longer an observable replica-count delta. In the admission-window race case, this means the spec was reverted to the pre-operation count (for example `3 → 2 → 3`) before any destructive membership change started. The controller aborts the recorded operation, clears `ScaleOperationInProgress`, and requeues.
- If the latest replica comparison points in the opposite direction from the recorded reason, an opposite-direction update landed inside the CEL window. The controller must not continue the recorded operation. It aborts the recorded operation, clears or recomputes `ScaleOperationInProgress`, and requeues so the latest desired operation is handled separately. No member is removed in this reconcile.

> For `BootstrapMembersRemoval`, the same principle applies, but the guard revalidates the latest `spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` against the observed joined bootstrap members instead of comparing replica counts. If the bootstrap-member removal request was reverted before `MemberRemove`, no member is removed and the condition is cleared or recomputed.

Reviewer 5: Also may be mention that member removal will only happen if members are in the status (.status.bootStrapWithExistingMember) as well.

Author: Updated as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/commits/eecc0a47dc621e04c6357a3b689d5d9be524e42a.

> For `BootstrapMembersRemoval`, the same principle applies, but the guard revalidates the latest `spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` against the observed joined bootstrap members instead of comparing replica counts. If the bootstrap-member removal request was reverted before `MemberRemove`, no member is removed and the condition is cleared or recomputed.

Reviewer 5: What if user trigger scale in and BootstrapMembersRemoval happens together? Should we disallow it?

Author: Yes, this is already disallowed. The "Decrease spec.replicas" row in the CEL validation table rejects a scale-in while a BootstrapMembersRemoval is in progress:

// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:message="Cannot scale in while a scale-out or bootstrap members removal operation is in progress.",rule="(self.spec.replicas < oldSelf.spec.replicas && self.spec.replicas > 0 && oldSelf.spec.replicas > 0) ? !self.status.conditions.exists(c, c.type == 'ScaleOperationInProgress' && c.status == 'True' && (c.reason == 'ScalingOut' || c.reason == 'BootstrapMembersRemoval')) : true"
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:message="Cannot remove bootstrap members while scale-in or scale-out is in progress.",rule="has(oldSelf.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster) && has(self.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster) && self.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members != oldSelf.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members ? !self.status.conditions.exists(c, c.type == 'ScaleOperationInProgress' && c.status == 'True' && (c.reason == 'ScalingIn' || c.reason == 'ScalingOut')) : true"

> // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:message="Cannot unset bootstrapWithExistingCluster while scale-in or scale-out is in progress.",rule="has(oldSelf.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster) && !has(self.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster) ? !self.status.conditions.exists(c, c.type == 'ScaleOperationInProgress' && c.status == 'True' && (c.reason == 'ScalingIn' || c.reason == 'ScalingOut')) : true"

Reviewer 5: SHould also not allow to set `etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is status still has  `bootstrapWithExistingCluster`.

Author: bootstrapWithExistingCluster cannot be added after the Etcd resource is created.

##### Member removal in `StatefulSet.PreSync` (Step 4c)

`StatefulSet.PreSync` calls `ensureMemberRemoval` for `ScalingIn` and `BootstrapMembersRemoval`.

Scale-in introduces direct etcd member removal from `etcd-druid` using an etcd v3 client. `ensureMemberRemoval` connects through the corresponding Etcd cluster's Kubernetes etcd client Service and uses client TLS credentials from the configured secret when client TLS is enabled. It uses the etcd client `MemberList()` API for membership discovery and removes at most one member per reconcile cycle with the etcd client `MemberRemove(id)` API. Each cycle recomputes the target set, so the operation can safely resume after controller restarts.

The removal proceeds in two distinct steps — selecting the set of candidates, then ordering the removals within that set:

1. Verify that removing another member keeps quorum intact.
2. **Select the candidate set** to remove:
   - `ScalingIn`: members with pod ordinal `≥ spec.replicas` (the highest ordinals, which preserves contiguous ordinals for the members that remain).

>    - `BootstrapMembersRemoval`: joined bootstrap members no longer present in spec, or all joined bootstrap members when `bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is unset.

Reviewer 5: Could you please clarify how the source will be handled here? What if some scaling(scale-in or scale-out) operation is being performed on the source?

Also maybe add a note that the source cluster will not be usable since all the source members will be removed from the etcd cluster.

Author: updated as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/commits/eecc0a47dc621e04c6357a3b689d5d9be524e42a

| `ScaleOperationInProgress` | True   | ScalingOut                | Scale-out in progress — set so the admission gate can reject a scale-in that races an in-flight scale-out (see below) |
| `ScaleOperationInProgress` | False  | —                         | No scale operation in progress |

The condition is used by:

- CEL validation rules to reject conflicting concurrent scale changes.
- `StatefulSet.PreSync` to decide whether to run the member-removal branch.

The `ScalingOut` reason does not change the existing scale-out mechanics from [DEP-03](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/03-scaling-up-an-etcd-cluster.md). Scale-out remains driven by a `spec.replicas` increase; new members join as learners via the `etcd-backup-restore` sidecar. The reason is introduced as a coordination marker for the symmetric admission gate: while a scale-out is in flight, a racing scale-in must be rejected for the same conflict reason described above. The controller therefore records `ScalingOut` for CEL to read, while the actual scale-out flow remains unchanged.

#### CEL validation rules

> The existing [field-level rule that blocks `replicas` decreases](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/api/core/v1alpha1/etcd.go#L385) will be removed so that multi-node clusters can be scaled in declaratively. Scaling to `replicas: 0` remains handled by the existing `replicas → 0` code path (see Non-Goals) and is unaffected by the new rules, which apply only when both `self.spec.replicas > 0` and `oldSelf.spec.replicas > 0`.

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
The existing [field-level rule that blocks `replicas` decreases](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/api/core/v1alpha1/etcd.go#L385) will be removed so that multi-node clusters can be scaled-in declaratively. Hibernation (`replicas: N → 0`) remains covered by the existing hibernation flow.
```

Author: Updated in the recent commit

| User action | Allowed when | Rejected when |
|-------------|--------------|---------------|
| Increase `spec.replicas` | No `ScalingIn` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` is in progress | `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingIn` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` |

> | Decrease `spec.replicas` | No `ScalingOut` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` is in progress | `ScaleOperationInProgress=True` with reason `ScalingOut` or `BootstrapMembersRemoval` |

Reviewer 3: what happens when a scaleout is triggered while it's already `ScalingOut` and if a scalein is triggered while it's already `ScalingIn`? From this matrix, it looks like we're allowing such operations but is that a completely safe operation? or will it mix things up? We might want to make sure that one operation is finished entirely before starting new operation. Can you please confirm this?

Author: I've already updated the DEP in a recent commit. It explicitly states: "Let an in-flight scale-in (or scale-out) complete and reject the opposite-direction scaling until it does." Do you think this is enough as a reply?

| `bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is unset, or joined bootstrap members are removed from spec | `ScaleOperationInProgress=True`, reason `BootstrapMembersRemoval` |
| No scale signal is present | `ScaleOperationInProgress=False` |

The condition is patched before component reconciliation starts, allowing CEL validation to reject conflicting changes while the operation is in progress.

##### Member removal in `StatefulSet.PreSync` (Step 4c)

`StatefulSet.PreSync` calls `ensureMemberRemoval` for `ScalingIn` and `BootstrapMembersRemoval`.

Scale-in introduces direct etcd member removal from `etcd-druid` using an etcd v3 client. `ensureMemberRemoval` connects through the corresponding Etcd cluster's Kubernetes etcd client Service and uses client TLS credentials from the configured secret when client TLS is enabled. It uses the etcd client `MemberList()` API for membership discovery and removes at most one member per reconcile cycle with the etcd client `MemberRemove(id)` API. Each cycle recomputes the target set, so the operation can safely resume after controller restarts.

The removal sequence is:

> 1. Verify that removing another member keeps quorum intact.

Reviewer: If the member cannot be removed right now because it will cause loss of quorum, then where is that reflected in the `Etcd` status?

Author: This is reflected in status.lastErrors

2. Recompute the members to remove:
   - `ScalingIn`: members with pod ordinal `≥ spec.replicas`.
   - `BootstrapMembersRemoval`: joined bootstrap members no longer present in spec, or all joined bootstrap members when `bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is unset.

> 3. Select the next candidate: learners first, then non-leader voters, and the leader last if it is part of the removal set.

Reviewer: This is not clear, for scale-in operations you now have an order where you choose learners first, then non-leader voters and then leader but then again you always scale-in from the highest index to the lowest index to preserve contiguous indices for remainder of members (post removal). These two criteria seems to contradict.

Author: The intent was that this ordering — learner → non-leader voter → leader — applies only among the already-selected candidates (the surplus members with ordinal ≥ spec.replicas); it determines the order in which those candidates are removed. It never selects members below spec.replicas — those always remain.

Anyway, I've rephrased the wording and updated the DEP.

4. Call the etcd client `MemberRemove(id)` API and requeue so the next reconcile observes the updated cluster state.

> Serial removal is intentional. It avoids parallel membership changes in the same etcd cluster and gives the cluster one reconcile cycle to stabilize between removals. Conditions, events, and logs should reference member names; member IDs remain internal to the helper.

Reviewer: >Conditions, events, and logs should reference member names; member IDs remain internal to the helper.

It makes sense for conditions and events to perhaps only refer to member names. I am not sure why you have added logs to the list. It can contain member ID information as well, right? What is the issue that you see?

Author: Agreed — logs can carry member IDs.

Author: Updated the doc

##### PVC deletion in `StatefulSet.PreSync` (Step 4d)

**This step runs only for `ScalingIn`**, since only an `etcd.spec.replicas` decrease frees PVCs that the controller owns. `BootstrapMembersRemoval` does not delete PVCs because the removed members belong to the source etcd cluster.

> A StatefulSet does not reclaim the PVCs of removed ordinals on scale-down — the default `persistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicy` retains them — so `etcd-druid` must delete the surplus PVCs explicitly; Kubernetes does not do it for us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A StatefulSet does not reclaim the PVCs of removed ordinals on scale-in — the default `persistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicy` retains them — so `etcd-druid` must delete the surplus PVCs explicitly; Kubernetes does not do it for us.
```

> This deletion is kept in `StatefulSet.PreSync` because the scale-in context is already established there: the controller has just removed the surplus members and knows the `etcd.spec.replicas` < `StatefulSet.spec.replicas` delta that identifies exactly which ordinals are surplus. Moving PVC deletion into `StatefulSet.Sync` would force `Sync` to re-derive that same scale-in context, splitting one logical operation (remove the members, then release the storage they backed) across two components. Keeping both halves in `PreSync`, gated on the same `ScaleOperationInProgress` condition and the same "membership has converged" check, keeps the scale-in decision in one place.

Reviewer: PVC is tied to a statefulset pod. Does it not make more sense to do the deletion of the PVC in the statefulset sync itself where you will reduce the replicas of the STS? Before you reduce the replicas you essentially delete the PVC.

>Moving PVC deletion into `StatefulSet.Sync` would force `Sync` to re-derive that same scale-in context

Why do you think this is a problem. You have etcd.Spec.Replicas and then you have sts.spec.replicas, how hard is it to find out that there is a scale-in? What else do you require?

>splitting one logical operation (remove the members, then release the storage they backed

Removing members is only semantically tied to a STS pod (because of what runs inside the pod) and hence doing that in a pre-sync is fine. PVC on the other hand is tied to STS.

Author: I've updated the doc to move PVC deletion to sync

> Deleting in `PreSync` is also safe: the only action taken here is issuing the `Delete` (stamping `deletionTimestamp`) — it does **not** reclaim the volume, which happens lazily once the surplus pod unmounts during `Sync`. Because the intent is persisted on the PVC object, it also survives a controller restart across the membership-removal → pod-termination boundary. There is therefore no ordering dependency that forces this into `Sync`.

Reviewer: This point is not very clear. Why is deletion safe in `PreSync` vs in `Sync`?

Author: Updated the doc. moved to sync

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start[backup-restore init]
    Start --> Multi{Multi-node?}
    Multi -->|No| Normal[Normal init]
    Multi -->|Yes| WAL{WAL exists?}
    WAL -->|No| Normal
    WAL -->|Yes| Read[Read local member ID]
    Read --> DB{boltdb exists?}
    DB -->|No| Normal
    DB -->|Yes| Open[Open boltdb read-only]
    Open -->|Fail| Failed[ErrMembershipCheckFailed]
    Open -->|OK| Removed{Own ID in members_removed?}
    Removed -->|No| Normal
    Removed -->|Yes| Stop[ErrMemberPermanentlyRemoved]
```

The check is deliberately conservative:

- If the WAL is missing, there is no local member ID to check, so normal initialization continues.
- If the boltdb file is missing, normal initialization continues through the existing path.

> - If boltdb exists but cannot be opened, the check is retried a few times (with backoff) to ride out transient I/O or lock contention; if it still cannot be opened, startup fails closed with `ErrMembershipCheckFailed`.

Reviewer: Is this not the case for data directory corruption? Typically you will start single member restoration in this case. So now if you exit with ErrMembershipCheckFailed then will this hamper single member restoration for a valid member?

Author: The guard does not interfere with single-member restoration.

---
title: Scaling-in a multi-node etcd cluster
dep-number: 08
creation-date: 2026-06-15
status: implementable
authors:
- "@seshachalam-yv"
- "@CaptainIRS"
reviewers:
- "@etcd-druid-maintainers"
- "@acumino"
---

# DEP-08: Scaling-in a multi-node etcd cluster managed by `etcd-druid`

## Summary

Today, `etcd-druid` blocks any decrease of `etcd.spec.replicas` other than to zero, so operators have no declarative way to shrink a multi-node etcd cluster.

This proposal introduces safe scale-in support for multi-node etcd clusters managed by `etcd-druid`, enabling a cluster to shrink without risking quorum loss or leaving etcd membership in an inconsistent state. The user experience is symmetric with scale-out: the operator only changes the `Etcd` resource, and `etcd-druid` removes members safely.

## Terminology

- **`bootstrapWithExistingCluster`** — the mechanism by which a new `Etcd` joins an existing etcd cluster instead of forming its own, configured via `spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster`. See [Bootstrap with an Existing etcd Cluster](../concepts/bootstrap-with-existing-cluster.md).

## Motivation

> `etcd-druid` supports scaling an etcd cluster *out* declaratively, but not *in*: the current admission rule rejects any decrease of `etcd.spec.replicas` other than to zero. Operators therefore have no safe, declarative way to shrink a multi-node cluster. Two concrete use cases need this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`etcd-druid` supports scaling an etcd cluster *out* declaratively, but not *in*: the current admission rule rejects any decrease of `etcd.spec.replicas` other than to zero. Operators therefore have no safe, declarative way to shrink a multi-node cluster. Three concrete use cases need this.
```
In use cases you have mentioned 3 use-cases 😄

Author: Fixed as part of [d982469](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/commits/d982469fd5e6f309a3a6325d736f58832b7e28bf)

### Approach

Scale-in is orchestrated by `etcd-druid` through the existing [etcd controller](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/development/controllers.md#etcd-controller). The process is driven by changes to the `Etcd` resource, and progress is tracked explicitly through the `ScaleOperationInProgress` condition in the `Etcd.Status` to ensure deterministic coordination across reconcile cycles.

Scale-in is triggered when:

- An operator decreases `etcd.spec.replicas`, or
- An operator removes member entries from `etcd.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members` or unsets `etcd.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster`.

It aims to achieve safe scale-in by:

- Removing etcd cluster members one per reconcile cycle, in a quorum-safe order, before the underlying StatefulSet is shrunk.
- Deleting freed PVCs during `StatefulSet.Sync`, before the StatefulSet replica count is reduced, so the surplus PVCs are reclaimed as the pods are terminated.

> - Preventing removed members from silently rejoining by adding an anti-rejoin guard in `etcd-backup-restore`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Preventing removed members from silently rejoining by adding an [anti-rejoin guard](#anti-rejoin-guard) in `etcd-backup-restore`.
```

Author: Fixed as part of [d982469](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/commits/d982469fd5e6f309a3a6325d736f58832b7e28bf)

Without a guard, `etcd-backup-restore` interprets the state *"this pod has local etcd data, but its member ID is not present in the live cluster"* as a scale-out case and re-adds the removed member as a learner. The controller removes it again, the same pod re-adds itself, and the cluster enters a remove/re-add loop.

##### Proposed solution

`etcd-backup-restore` adds a startup guard before the learner-add path. The guard checks whether the local etcd member was already removed from the cluster. If so, startup stops with `ErrMemberPermanentlyRemoved` instead of re-adding the member.

etcd records removed member IDs in the local boltdb `members_removed` bucket when `MemberRemove` is applied. This is not about reusing etcd member IDs. `etcd-backup-restore` uses the local member's own tombstone to detect that the data directory belongs to a member that was explicitly removed from this cluster; in that case, it must not treat the missing live membership entry as a scale-out/re-add case.

The startup check is:

> The guard inspects two on-disk artefacts of the local etcd data directory: the **WAL** (under `<data-dir>/member/wal`) and the boltdb backend's **`members_removed`** bucket. The local member's own ID is read from the WAL's metadata record — the guard opens the WAL read-only (`wal.OpenForRead`), reads the metadata via `ReadAll()`, unmarshals it into an etcd `Metadata` message, and takes the `NodeID` field (this is the same sequence etcd itself uses on startup). It then checks whether that exact ID is present in the `members_removed` bucket. If it is, the cluster has explicitly removed this member and the sidecar must not re-add it.

Reviewer 2: > reads the metadata via `ReadAll()`

`ReadAll()` isn't a good way as it will end-up loading all the WAL entries into in-memory, which might spikes the memory... is there any other way possible ?

Reviewer 2: cc @CaptainIRS

Reviewer 6: The WAL files are limited to 64MB ([source](https://pkg.go.dev/go.etcd.io/etcd/server/v3/wal#:~:text=WAL%20will%20cut%20its%20current%20tail%20wal%20file%20if%20its%20size%20exceeds%2064MB)), so the maximum memory consumption at any point should be limited to 64MB, which is reasonable IMO. WDYT?

Reviewer 2: but there are `5` wal files (configurable by `--max-wals` default set to `5`), how do we know out of 5 which one has the metadata, or all wal file has metadata, so read any wal will work ?

Reviewer 6: I don't think we have to handle it ourselves as it is internally handled in https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/ee043b39e1757fede7cb7f261c1b547d8b188194/server/storage/wal/wal.go#L363. Maybe @seshachalam-yv can confirm.

Author: Will evaluate the memory concern during implementation.

 @CaptainIRS is right that the WAL segment iteration is handled internally by etcd [wal.go](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/ee043b39e1757fede7cb7f261c1b547d8b188194/server/storage/wal/wal.go#L363), and to answer @ishan16696's `--max-wals` question — the metadata record carrying the NodeID is written once at `wal.Create` and repeated in the header of every WAL segment, so it isn't a case of picking the right file; `wal.Open` surfaces it regardless of how many segments exist.

Reviewer 2: ok, let's keep this comment as unresolved so that we revisit this later once we have some data for memory footprints.

- [Bootstrap with an Existing etcd Cluster](../concepts/bootstrap-with-existing-cluster.md) — the join phase this DEP builds on; introduces `spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` and the `status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` list this proposal diffs against.
- [Existing CEL rule blocking scale-in](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/5b90b4a7dc7da4f4d35ea9905103d8b60b9f6e8e/api/core/v1alpha1/etcd.go#L546)
- [`Etcd` type declaration for object-level CEL rules](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/7a5ac3182/api/core/v1alpha1/etcd.go#L58-L62)
- [`reconcileSpec` orchestration](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/7a5ac3182/internal/controller/etcd/reconcile_spec.go#L28-L48)

### etcd internals (v3.5.27)
- [`server.go` — `RemoveMember` quorum checks](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/v3.5.27/server/etcdserver/server.go#L1721-L1738)
- [`store.go` — removed member IDs are written to `members_removed`](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/v3.5.27/server/etcdserver/api/membership/store.go#L71-L123)
- [`bucket.go` — `members` and `members_removed` bucket definitions](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/v3.5.27/server/mvcc/buckets/bucket.go#L31-L49)

> - [`storage.go` — WAL metadata contains the local member ID](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/v3.5.27/server/etcdserver/storage.go#L117-L121)

Reviewer 2: does it make sense to mention `v3.5.27` explicitly because in couple of months we may be moving to upgraded version etcd `3.5.27+` or `3.6.x` , then these reference will become obsolete right. I think these api will not change irrespective of releases, may be you can mention permanent link of latest commit from etcd, wdyt ?

Author: Fixed as part of [d982469](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/commits/d982469fd5e6f309a3a6325d736f58832b7e28bf)
